Hello, freak bitches. So my final point is,
is the falsifiability one that is, uh,
what would it take to refute your hypothesis? Like for me,
the answer would be like, if go, go Beckley,
Tepi turned out to be what you think it might've been
the place where advanced ancient civilization once inhabited or they
used it. Where are the metal tools?
W w where are the writing?
The examples of writing the decision was made.
Not to use metal, perhaps a decision was made that, uh,
errors had taken place that, that, that in reinventing civilization,
we shouldn't perhaps go down quite the same route as before, uh, perhaps rating.
Isn't always an advance, uh, perhaps perhaps, uh, an oral tradition, which,
which records in memory,
which enhances and uses the power of memory may be a very effective way of, of,
of dealing with information. We regard writing as a, as an advance.
And I can see lots of reasons why it isn't advanced,
but if we put our self into the heads of ancient peoples, maybe it wasn't.
I mean,
there's a tradition from ancient Egypt that the God thought both God of wisdom
was the inventor of writing, but we have, we have a taxed in which he is,
he is questioned by a Pharaoh who is, who is saying, well, actually,
have you really done a good thing by introducing writing?
Because then the words may roam around the world without wise advice to put them
into, into context and what will happen to memory when people do so,
so there might be a choice not to. Okay.
All right. But,
but then what do you mean by advanced when you say there used to be a last
advanced civilization before 10,000 years ago, but.
Let's just wait, pause here for a second,
because what we know for a fact is that the carbon dating in all the area around
Gobekli TAPI is somewhere around 12,000 years, is that 11,600.
Years ago, because the earliest they found so far,
but a great deal of go back to the tap is still underground.
Right? Right. So at least what we know is someone built some pretty impressive
structures, 11,600.
Years ago, 7,000 years before. So.
When, when that story broke, this is long before you came along with your book.
Uh,
it was controversial in the sense that we thought hunter gatherers could not do
something like this because to do that,
you need a large population with a division of labor and so forth.
And so what the response to archeologists was, well,
I guess we were wrong about hunter gatherers.
Maybe they can do more stuff than we gave them credit for.
So why is that not a reasonable hypothesis versus they were,
it was actually advanced,
but we mean something completely different by advanced,
not rioting and metal and technology. We mean, I don't know what you mean.
What do you mean? Well.
I mean, we have, we have a body of archeology which goes on for decades,
which is saying that megalithic sites, for example,
[inaudible] in Malta or Hungary, MoMA, nidra, megalithic sites, uh,
date to no older than five and a half to 6,000 years old Gigi tier would push it
close to 6,000 years old. And there are no older sites than that.
And therefore the megalithic site is associated with a certain stage of
neolithic development. Then along comes, got Beckley Tappy,
7,000 years older than Stonehenge, incredibly sophisticated site,
very large scale. I mean, cloud Smith, sadly he's passed away.
I spent three days working the site with them. He was very generous to me.
He showed me a lot. He talked to me a lot and he said basically 50 times,
as much as they've already excavated is still is still under the ground.
That there's hundreds and hundreds of giant stone pillars that they've
identified with ground penetrating radar. He's not even sure if they're ever,
if they're ever going to excavate them, but by all accounts, we are looking,
if we take, what's still under the ground into account,
we're looking at the largest megalithic site that's ever been created on earth.
And it pops up 11,600 years ago with no obvious
background to it. It just comes down to me. That's rather well that we know of.
But to me, that's a,
that's immediately a rather puzzling and interesting situation.
And I would be remiss as, as an author and an inquire into these matters.
If I didn't take great interest in that the sudden appearance,
7,000 years before Stonehenge,
you have a megalithic site that dwarfs Stonehenge to me,
that's a mystery and it's really worth inquiring. We love to.
Put it into perspective.
That's more than 2000 years older than what we now consider to be the
building of the great pyramid of Giza in comparison to us to then,
so between our time now in 2017 and the construction of the great pyramid,
you're talking about 2000 years earlier than that.
And that is unbelievable when you're talking about 7,000 years before what we
thought people were.
Okay. But, but my point was that instead of before we go down the road of
constructing a loss civilization that was super advanced,
but different from our idea of advance,
why not just attribute to these fully modern hunter gatherers who had the same
size brains we have. And so on that they were able to figure out and do this.
We just under estimated their abilities.
Y'all just tell us for so long hunter-gatherers couldn't do it.
And we needed agricultural populations that could generate surpluses that could
pay for them.
Yeah, actually that was the theory, but that was it.
So now with archeologists are saying, well,
I guess we were wrong about a hunter gatherer.
Well, they might be wrong about hunter gatherers,
or there might be another civilization that they had not discovered that is been
unearthed by time, but.
Not so much time lost.
Civilizations are not such an extraordinary idea. I mean,
nobody knew that the Indus valley civilization existed at all until some railway
work was done around ninja Daro. And in 1923,
suddenly a whole civilization pops up out of the woodwork.
That's just never been taken into account before the 1920s.
We still can't read it script. You know, the idea that we,
that we come across that another turn of the spade reveals information that
causes us to reconsider, not just was it hunter gatherers or agriculturalists,
but perhaps something bigger than this is involved in that. Not,
that's not such an extraordinary idea. I get it.
That mainstream archeology doesn't want to go there, but that's fine. No, I.
Don't. I don't think that that that's correct. They,
they would be happy to go there if there's evidence for it,
by what you just said, they now fully accept the Indus valley civilizations.
How did that happen if they were dogmatically closed-minded and say that they
were.
Dogmatically closed minded about that? The evidence,
the massive amount of evidence that came up with the discovery of Mahindra Daro,
her wrapper, dollar Vierra, and other and other such sides. It's very difficult.
You have to be completely stupid to say that that's not a civilization got
Beckley. Tap is a bit more nuanced. You know, we have stone,
we have stone circles. We have some interesting astronomical alignments.
The world's first, perfectly north, south aligned, built, maybe.
No, definitely. Again, that's a patternicity thing like clash Smith.
Well, that's all right.
But if any of us who read back into history 10,000 years ago,
what we're thinking that they might've been thinking that's always a dangerous
for anybody, not just.
You all. That's a good point. Who's Klaus Schmidt. Classmate.
Was the original excavator of Gabelli Tappy.
He was the head of the German archeological Institute.
Dig out to go back to Tappy. He kindly spent three days showing me,
uh,
around the site and really nobody's disputing the astronomical alignments I've
got back. They tell me they weren't particularly interesting to Klaus Schmidt,
but they're there. And.
What is the alignment like? How was it established when.
You have a perfectly north side, north, south aligned structure,
perfectly north, south to true north, not magnetic north.
Then you are dealing with astronomy by definition.
And there are other alignments of the stones true north.
As established today, or with the procession of the Equinox 12.
Okay. It's the rotation access of our planet.
Okay. So it, to this day,
it points exactly in the same place where it was pointing. Oh,
it was points the true north. Okay. Yeah.
But, but, but back to this, you know, they don't want to go. Sure.
They want to go there.
They would happy be happy to go there case in 0.2 weeks ago,
in the journal nature, the most prestigious scientific journal in the world,
there was published an article that humans,
or maybe Neanderthals lived in San Diego area 130,000 years ago.
This is an order of magnitude older than the Clovis date. This.
Was the Mastodon bones they found that were supposed.
To. So here's an example of how, okay,
so clearly there's not some conspiracy to keep alternative people or fringe or,
or radical theories out.
It was published in peer reviewed the most prestigious journal in the world.
There it is, Tommy. And what happened? Well, wasn't.
It, there'd been a massive reaction to that. And lots of,
lots of scathing remarks, lots of academics. And.
That's how, but that's normal. That's how science works. You get,
you get pushed back it's you gotta have a thick skin. It's just the way.
It goes. You've got to have a thick skin. That's that's for sure.
But maybe sometimes your skin is so thick that you just can't sense anything
around.
It. Of course we don't want that either.
You think is going on. When you look at something like duel, Beckley, Tappy,
that's covered cupboard up purposefully, right? Yes. Deliberately.
Buried again. I cite Klaus Smith. He he's the authority on this.
He's the excavator.
He absolutely adamantly insists that that site was buried and finally
covered with a hill, which is what got back.
The TAPI means in the Turkish language, potbellied hill. Yeah. And.
That you're talking about something.
Give me the perspective of how large they believe it is. Currently.
As of current what's excavated.
At the moment is on a scale of Stonehenge. What's under the ground.
Maybe as much as 50 times larger. Jeez.
[Inaudible] there no one lived there. There's no tools. There's no. Well,
you're talking about [inaudible] but if it's buried, it should be,
there should be pottery. There's no pottery, no writing,
no articles of clothing, no one lived there.
Nobody lived there. So why should they have pottery?
Why should pottery be in the field? But why would they,
why they go along and breaks and pots and stick it in the artificial.
Flavors, something they're trash. When they,
something that would indicate it's different,
a different kind of people than what we're used to seeing in the archeological
record. It's just.
Rubbish that they poured in. It's just stones in earth.
Yeah. In other words, grant for you to gain, uh, support for your theory,
amongst mainstream archeologists,
they want to see positive evidence to overturn the old theory. In other words,
the burden of proof is on the person, challenging the mainstream in every field.
There's some proof that the, the,
the mainstream idea of these hunters and gatherers w never had anything in
what the theory was that would indicate these people were capable of building
something, even remotely the size of go Beckley town. Yeah. To me.
That's the stunning beauty of this.
Find it overturns ideas of primitive hunter gatherers that could not do this.
Apparently they can.
Is that possible? Yes.
That's right. So this, I call this somebody else,
the bigotry of low expectations, you know,
it's like we had this kind of low expectations for these hunter gatherers.
Maybe we should jettison that idea.
And in my own other field of the history of religion,
it also threw that off because this apparently was a kind of a spiritual
religious that's the wrong word they.
Would have used, actually, nobody can, nobody can know that.
That's right. So, but if it was,
this is the big national geographic article emphasize that maybe this is the
very first religious,
spiritual temple ever built because they didn't live there.
So they went there for a reason.
Is it also possible that this is signs that civilization was more advanced
12,000 years ago than we thought?
Okay. More advanced, what do we, again, what do we mean by.
Talking about the ability to be, to construct an amazing structure? Okay.
How big.
Was it like how tall are these stones? Some of them are 20 feet tall.
Some of them with, with, with, uh, astronomical.
Alignments, clash Smith called it a center of innovation.
He was intrigued by the way that agriculture emerges around Gobekli Tappy.
At the same time that Gabelli TAPI is, is, is created. I mean,
he went on record with me, perhaps he's not right,
but he went on record with me as saying that was the first agriculture.
These were the people who invented agriculture. Now to me,
the notion that a group of hunter-gatherers wake up one morning and invent
megalithic architecture, the world's largest megalithic site.
And at the same moment, invent agriculture, stretches credulity a bit.
And I think I would prefer to propose. And I have that.
What we're looking at is evidence of some kind of transfer of technology that
people came into that area who had other knowledge, but that was a plate.
And perhaps they mobilized the local population around this site,
perhaps that's precisely why we see agriculture developing there.
So perhaps that's the skill that's being passed on.
But, but I don't see anything particularly, okay. The stone work is spectacular,
but that that's not any more advanced than a few centers,
a few millennium afterwards.
But you're talking about something 20 feet tall made of stone that we know
people that were hunter gatherers.
A couple of hundred people can move multi ton stones, history.
And moving the stones still moving 20 ton stones in Indonesia today. I mean,
megalithic culture, you also know.
That the carving on the outside is extremely complex is three-dimensional
carving. Okay. But I mean, you know, that means, do you know what that means?
Let's go at 30,000 years ago has magnificent cave paintings with three
dimensions, but.
That's painting. You know, that, hold on a second. Do you know what I'm saying?
When I say three-dimensional carvings, the Venus,
the carvings were on the outside, meaning they didn't carve them into the rock.
They carved away the rock around them,
which is pretty sophisticated stuff for hunter gatherers.
And they're doing this on these 20 foot tall stone columns. I mean,
it's pretty impressive stuff.
Okay. But th there, the assumption is that,
that they couldn't have figured this out.
We know from modern societies where say Australian Aborigines,
uh, in one generation, they go from stone tools to fly in airplanes.
The brains are quite capable of doing these amazing things.
[inaudible].
Planes, without somebody introducing them to airplanes.
You're actually making his argument for them. No, no.
It's not that much of a reach to carve stone.
People have been carving stones for that, the entire archeological.
Opinion on megalithic sites for decades before this was precisely that it was
beyond their ability.
And now the mainstream has changed. It's fine. Let's,
let's start at the very least we'll shift.
Let's pause for a moment. Let's pause for a moment. So for sure,
we all agree human beings made this. Yes.
Even so the object, so the argument is not whether or not aliens made it.
The argument is whether or not humans made it that we're sophisticated.
Well, they're clearly sophisticated enough to make this incredible structure
that is,
is some sign of some sort of civilization. I believe so. Yeah,
it is. It's a gigantic structure. I.
Agree with Graham that we we've, again, undersold who these people were.
My friend, Jared diamond goes to Papa, new Guinea. He talks at the,
in the opening chapter of guns, germs, and steel,
how smart these people are that live out there in nature and what it takes to
survive. He wouldn't last an hour, you know,
from LA he wouldn't last an hour with his pop into Guinea and friends out there
in the, in the wild well that's.
Because he doesn't know how to survive.
And they've been passing down the information for generation after generation
smart.
Okay. So it's not a word, it's not a problem of intelligence. And is there, uh,
okay.
So here's the other thing we don't know is that there might be lots more of
these sites and where there's the jar. I visited.
One of them, Cara and taffy. You've got,
you've got the T-shaped pillars sticking out the side of a hill in the farmers'
backyard. I mean,
I think we're actually at the beginning of opening up this inquiry,
not at the end of it, but, but.
Then it'd be before you. Okay. Why not just say, we don't know,
this is a spectacular mystery. You leave it at that. Right? Why write a book.
That says I'm going to fill in all the gaps.
On the mainstream side, won't speculate and word explore.
I don't claim to be an archeologist. I'm not a scientist. I'm an author.
It's my job to offer an alternative point of view and to offer a coherently
argued, alternative point of view. And I must say,
go Beckley TAPI strikes me as a gigantic mystery and a
mystery that is worthy of exploration from a point of view that may
not satisfy you. Oh, well, it doesn't, you don't have to satisfy me.
You and your, you and your colleagues. And I don't, I don't,
I certainly don't have to satisfy you or them. That's not my project.
Like your opening chapter with Schmidt. I thought I really loved the, um, the,
the kind of conversational style you had with Schmidt in the book where he's
dialoguing, where Schmidt goes and look at this. And then he says, but, but,
but what, wait, what's that again? Now he's like a little bit like Colombo,
like what, wait, I have just one more quick, just one more question.
And you know, the mystery kind of thickens. That's perfectly. Okay.
That's great. I mean, that's,
that's what science is all about is uncovering mysteries that we then have to
figure out. So there's always more mysteries,
but that doesn't mean that's not positive.
And it's in favor of a particular theory, like a loss civilization. It's just,
we can't explain this full stop.
Yeah, we certainly can't explain it.
And you can explain it by saying that we underestimated hunter and gatherers
either.
Well, why not? We know they made it whatever you want to call them. Well,
we know humans made it that's right. We know humans made it.
So whenever you want.
To, why,
but why do they believe that people were only hunters and gatherers 12,000 years
ago? It's because they didn't have any evidence. The contract, right?
This is evidence to the contrary. I agree.
So you agree that there weren't hovering hunter and gatherers.
Okay. But there's, there's several stages in between just, you know,
12 people living out in the jungle by themselves versus us. You know,
there's like a whole bunch of different.
I would say that go, Beckley TAPI is a gigantic age. Well.
We don't okay. They didn't live there. So we have to figure out what, where,
where were they living and what was there? So that, that has to be excavated.
Well, they only excavated 10%.
Meanwhile,
what you're saying is that we shouldn't speculate at all because I mean,
mainstream.
Archeology speculating, archeologist speculating.
When saying it's definitely was hunter gatherers who did this,
that's also a speculation.
Okay. But not okay. It may, they may be more than hunter gatherers. They,
they may have been partially settled there's you can have any kind of number of
state you can't apparently have is.
The possibility of a transfer of technology from people who are really masters
of that technology already when they came in. But where are these people?
Whereas when you're dealing with 12,000 years ago,
fingerprints now let's find their homes. I don't know.
I don't know that their homes matter,
would their homes even survive after 12,000 years?
I'm not sure, but what survives, there's something, what.
Would be trash and tools we've got go Beckley Tappy. It confronts us.
It challenges the mainstream model.
I think it's reasonable to consider the possibility that there was something
more than just hunter-gatherers involved here in creating this extraordinary
place. But that's all I've done.
It seems to me that too, to say hunter gatherers could build this.
I'm not, I wouldn't be opposed to the idea that they're hunting and gathering,
but it does certainly imply a lot of leisure time. Yes. A lot of leisure.
Time. We know a hundred yet. Sorry. That's okay. Let's see.
Well, again, if we place this back,
particularly within that climate zone at 11,006 to 12,000,
13,000 years ago, whatever it turns out to be,
we're dealing with an extremely demanding and challenging climate, which,
which wouldn't necessarily to my mind,
be conducive to the emergence of a settled culture that
would be capable of undertaking a project on this scale.
And as somebody who's built a lot of things and moved quite a few heavyweights
in my time, um, I find it just the,
the idea sort of perplexing to me that they would be w
what I, what I would have to ask is what is their motive?
What is their motive for undertaking a project on this scale?
Because it's an enormous project.
And to move a 20 ton block of stone is really a challenging
task to undertake today today. Well, without, without, you know, uh,
you know, the infrastructure of, of,
of large machines and so forth, um,
but to do it by hand, it would be an enormous undertaking. And, and I,
you know, to me, it's like,
when are they having time to hunt and gather when you're engaged in a project of
this scale.
But we know hunter-gatherers have way more free time than modern society people
do. That's the one thing we've learned is that it's,
it's a pretty good way to make a living. Actually, they have a better,
very diet than we have. This is the, you know, the Neanderthal diet, right?
They have a better, very diet and a lot more free time. Yeah. But that's.
A lot less stress. We knew that all along.
About hunter gatherers,
when we were saying they couldn't build megalithic sites, but we're, we're,
we're looking at time to do it.
We're we're the environment is undergoing rapid changes to which
adaptations would be extremely challenging.
And we know those changes are going on all over the planet.
We know that sea levels are rapidly rising over a period of a few thousand
years from, from a low C stand low of about 400 feet up to the present level.
We also know that that by Otis we're shifting dramatically all over the
planet, they, they,
the effects of the younger Dryas were global pretty much that is,
I think the emerging consensus now that that both hemispheres north and
south were being affected by the climate changes of the younger Dryas.
So what we're doing is replacing this, this phenomena, this, this project,
within this context of these extremely challenging times in which, you know,
adaptation to the environmental changes could easily be the,
the all consuming challenge of the times.
I'm just finding it difficult to imagine it, a disconnect to,
to see this disconnect between a project of this magnitude
and the motive for doing it during a time when
obviously the environment could be posing serious constraints upon
people's ability to function in that.
Right. Random, we don't even know the motives of the Easter Islanders.
We don't re raise these huge, but we know they did it, but.
Isn't that become a central question? No. What something had to have motivated,
but then let's get back to tobacco tippy. So we, so let's just be real clear.
We know that we're humans, we know that it's at least 12,000 years old,
and we know that the real dispute here, the real question is,
did these people have structures? And did they have agriculture?
We know that they were human beings. They were essentially modern human beings.
So, or they hunter gatherers, or did they have structures? Yeah.
Before I got exactly.
Tappy,
they didn't have structures and they didn't have agriculture after going back a
Tappy. They did.
The fact that they were able to build something so monumental,
what kind of a leap is it at all to think that these people could figure out how
to plant food and figure out how to make a house?
Well.
I mean, again, if you look back 30,000 years,
40,000 years to these cave paintings, these are pretty sophisticated, beautiful.
Clearly they had abstract reasoning.
They could think from the concrete to the abstract and so on.
It's not a big reach to go from that to moving stones around.
I'd say there's a big difference between painting and engraving on cave.
Walls. Yeah. [inaudible].
Largest megalithic site that's ever been built on earth. Wait a minute.
I think there's a bit huge difference between those two. I mean,
nobody would compare the construction effort on,
on Stonehenge or Gigante or with, with cave paintings. I agree with you,
the cave paintings are magnificent.
I've had the privilege to visit many of the painted cave, stunning work.
And as Picasso said, when he came out of Alaska, we have invented nothing,
right? I mean, they were this, that was that modern human mind,
symbolic minded work there, but this is another matter.
This is a large scale construction project that's going on.
And it's not just a construction person. That's like huts,
it's hundreds and hundreds of very, very large megalithic pillars,
which have to be mobilized brought to the place, you know,
organizing a workforce, uh, in order to do that.
Even that requires preparation and time and learning and practice.
It's not something that you wake up one morning and just can do overnight.
You think that the paintings are more impressive than go Beckley Tappy?
Yeah. Or at least comparable.
I think that's, I think that's absolutely ridiculous.
To convey three dimensionality on a 2d plane.
That that's what Picasso met is like, wow, that's a Crow.
It's like developing perspective and to use the natural shape, it's just,
but it's not create a three-dimensional perspective. Look, is it,
that's pretty abstract comparing.
Apples and pears. It's not a construction project, right? It's it's.
Not, I don't think it's parent, but I don't think it's even remotely. No.
What I'm saying.
Is that it doesn't take a huge leap of imagination to take these people were
pretty smart. They had.
It. No, that they were smart. We know what they were smart,
just because of the fact that those construction projects were done by who,
by whoever we know that they were smart, whoever bill go,
Beckley taboo was clearly intelligent. Whoever made those 3d carvings,
clearly they were intelligent.
But to think that someone drawing on cave paintings is more impressive.
20 foot stone columns with three dimensional carvings on them of a lot of
animals that weren't even native to the, to the region.
That's a debatable cause they could have been animals.
But my point Joe is that these paintings are like say 30,
40,000 years old to go Beckley tippy.
So there's tens of thousands of years to develop more that we were
very likely to find more archeological.
Sites up till.
Now. We haven't found that we haven't,
we haven't found all of that intermediate material, which is see if I,
if I could actually see that intermediate material between the upper upper
paleolithic cave art and go back to the TAPI.
If I could see the gradual evolution and development of skills,
I wouldn't need to invoke a lost civilization,
the survivors of a lost civilization.
Who've mastered those skills elsewhere to come in and teach those skills that go
Beckley Tabby. But it still looks to me like a transfer of technology,
unless you can show me that evolutionary process whereby I can understand how
this group of hunter-gatherers became equipped to create this giant site where
they practiced, where they learn the skills to move the stones,
to organize the workforce,
to feed and water the workforce in a rather dry place.
All of that is actually quite a logistical challenge. Yep.
And obviously somebody met it somehow.
Some humans. Yeah. So the real question is, did they have structures?
Did they have agriculture?
Did they have some sort of a community where they lived in this established
location? I would, I would imagine. So would,
that would push back the time where we thought that there was a civilization
that would push them back into a realm of at least stead stepping out of the
hunter gatherer stage.
Schmid as you show in your book, he did not go as far as you know,
but he admitted it's a mystery. Okay. Why that would be the scientific approach?
I don't know what it is. Great mystery. Let's just wait and see. Versus, uh,
I'm going to postulate a lot of civilization, nothing wrong with that grant.
It's a free country and scientists do this all the time. As,
as you've mentioned.
A rather humorous thing, which I have to say, actually,
I might even ask Jamie to pull up the, um, the, a couple of images of, uh,
fingerprints of the gods. That's the book I'm best known for. Uh, and when I,
uh, published fingerprints of the gods in 1995,
essentially I was saying civilization is much older and much more
mysterious than we thought.
And I was ridiculed for proposing that 2013.
One of the magazines that ridiculed me,
new scientist magazine in Britain publishes as a cover story picture of Rebecca
Tappy and the headline civilization is much older and much more mysterious.
Sorry. Fair enough. Fair enough. Okay. Fair enough. And, and,
and scientists do do this. I mean,
I've followed paleoanthropology for my whole adult life.
And one of the big mysteries is how did we get a big brain?
How do we get to abstract reasoning from, from say, what chimps can do?
No one knows the doubling of the human brain size over a period of 2 million
years, right? No one knows.
Uh, every couple of years there's a new book out it's climate change.
It was throwing arm, cooking, cooking, meat, you know,
meat is another big one, a Harvard meat. Okay.
And these books come and go and some of them have legs.
Some of them don't and it's just the way it goes. And then there's Terence.
McKenna was pretty obvious. It was psychedelics. Yeah.
That's Terrence McKenna's.
Theory, but that switched the brain. That's.
The old Julian. Um, the, uh, [inaudible].
Mind. This is David Lewis, Williams.
Who's professor of anthropology at the university of Witwatersrand in South
Africa, his neuropsychological theory of cave art, uh,
all kudos to Terence McKenna and food of the gods. He,
what a brilliant thinker, what a brilliant alternative thinker,
but David Lewis Williams at the university of Witwatersrand had been working on
this problem since 1973. And his,
his argument is that the remarkable similarities that we see in rock and cave
art all around the world, uh,
are explained that we're dealing with a shamanistic art shamanism involves
altered states of consciousness.
This is typical visions of altered states of consciousness.
And it seems to have a company, a great leap forward in human behavior.
And you've covered this in your book. I covered it. It's natural as.
Did, uh, you know, Richard rang them's theory. He's this is a highly regarded,
um, scientists at Harvard. So he's the meat eating guy that cooking meat, right?
So by cooking the protein,
that's what gives you the energy to build a huge brain? All right.
So now this guy is starting with 10, 10 pluses on his side,
he's Harvard and already respected. And even so his book was like, eh,
maybe probably.
A series of different events and a bunch of different factors. That's right.
It could be a number of different things.